# Lecture 21 March 2023

## Lemma 3.6.12
Assuming $MA(\aleph_1)$. Let $X$ be a ccc space and $\{U_\alpha:\alpha < \omega_1\}$ be a family of nonempty open subsets of $X$. Then there is an uncountable $A \subseteq \omega_1$ such that $\{U_\alpha : \alpha \in A\}$ has the fip.

*Proof*. For each $\alpha \in \omega_1$, define $V_\alpha = \bigcup_{\xi\in\alpha} U_\xi$.
Note that $\langle V_\alpha:\alpha \in \omega_1 \rangle$ is $\subseteq$-decreasing.
**Claim** there is some $\alpha \in \omega_1$ such that 
$$\overline{V_\beta} = \overline{V_\alpha}\quad \text{for all }\beta \geq \alpha.$$
(Using ccc; we will only consider $V_\beta$ for $\beta \geq \alpha$.)

Suppose not. There for each $\alpha \in \omega_1$, 
there is some $\beta>\alpha$ such that $\overline{V_\beta} \subsetneq \overline{V_\alpha}$.
Then, there is a strictly increasing sequence 
$\langle \alpha_\xi: \xi\in\omega_1\rangle$ such that $\overline{V_{\alpha_{\xi+1}}} \subsetneq \overline{V_{\alpha_{\xi}}}$ for each $\xi$.

So, for each $\xi$, $\overline{V_{\alpha_\xi}} \not\subseteq \overline{V_{\alpha_{\xi+1}}}$ which implies $V_{\alpha_\xi}\not\subseteq \overline{V_{\alpha_{\xi+1}}}$.
Then, for each $\xi$, $V_{\alpha_\xi} \setminus \overline{V_{\alpha_{\xi+1}}}$ is open and non-empty.

Hence $\{V_{\alpha_{\xi}} \setminus \overline{V_{\alpha_{\xi+1}}}:\xi \in \omega_1\}$ is an uncountable family of (pointwise) disjoint open non-empty sets.

This is impossible where $X$ has ccc.

By the claim, we may assume, WLOG, that
$\overline{V_\beta}$'s are equal for all $\beta \in \omega_1$ (i.e., $\alpha$ in the claim is $0$).

$V_0 \supseteq V_1 \supseteq V_2 \dots$

Define a poset $(\mathcal{P}, \leq)$ by
$$\mathbb{P}=\{p\subseteq V_0:p\text{ is open and non-empty}\}.$$
$$= \{p \in \mathbb{O}_X: p \subseteq V_0\}$$
and $p \leq q$ iff $p \subseteq q$. (Note: $\mathbb{P}$ is a subposet of $\mathbb{O}_X$.)

This poset is ccc since $X$ (and $V_0$) has ccc
(subposet that has ccc also has ccc.)

### The set has FIP!
For each $\beta \in \omega_1$, define
$$D_\beta = \{p\in \mathbb{P}: \exists \xi> \beta\,(p\subseteq U_\xi)\}$$
To see that $D_\beta$ is dense, let $p\in\mathbb{P}$. (Let $V_\beta = \bigcup_{\xi>\beta}U_\xi$.)
Since $\overline{V_0} = \overline{V_\beta}$ and $p \subseteq V_0$,
$$p \cap V_\beta \neq \varnothing.$$
(If $p\cap V_\beta = \varnothing$ then $p \cap \overline{V_\beta} = \varnothing$.)
so $p\cap U_\xi \neq \varnothing$ for some $\xi > \beta$.
Choose $q = p \cap U_\xi$. Then, $q \leq p$ and $q \in D_\beta$.

Now, we consider $\mathcal{D} = \{D_\beta:\beta \in \omega_1\}$
is a collection of dense subsets of $\mathbb{P}$, and $|\mathcal{D}| \leq \omega_1$.

By $MA(\aleph_1)$, there is a filter $G \subseteq \mathbb{P}$ such that 
$G \cap D_\beta \neq \varnothing$ for all $\beta \in \omega_1$.

Define,
$$A = \{\xi \in \omega_1:\exists p \in G(p \subseteq U_\xi)\}.$$
$A$ is unbounded in $\omega_1$: Let $\beta\in\omega_1$.
Since $G \cap D_\beta \neq \varnothing$, we can pick $p \in G \cap D_\beta$.
As $p\in D_\beta$, $p \subseteq U_\xi$ for some $\xi > \beta$. So, $\xi \in A$.

$\{U_\xi : \xi \in A\}$ has the fip:
Let $U_{\alpha_1}, \dots, U_{\alpha_n}$ with $\alpha_1, \dots, \alpha_n \in A$.
Then, for each $i\in\{1,\dots, n\}$, $U_{\alpha_i} \supseteq p_{i}$ for some $p_i \in G$.

Since $G$ is a filter, there is some $q \in G$ s.t. $q \leq p_i$ for all $i\in \{1,\dots, n\}$.
So $\varnothing \neq q \subseteq U_{\alpha_i}$ for all $i$. Hence, $\bigcap_{i=1}^\infty U_{\alpha_i} \neq \varnothing.$

---

## Lemma 3.6.13
Assuming $MA(\aleph_1)$. Any product of two ccc spaces is also ccc.

*Proof*. Suppose $X,Y$ are ccc spaces.
Let $\mathcal{D} = \{U_\alpha \times C_\alpha: \alpha\in\omega_1\}$ be a collection
of basic open subsets of $X \times Y$.

Idea: using Lemma 3.6.12 but the index may be not the same.

Consider $\{U_\alpha:\alpha\in\omega\}$ since $X$ is ccc by Lemma 3.6.12, there is an uncountable $A\subseteq\omega_1$ such that
$$\{U_\alpha : \alpha \in A\}$$
has the fip.
Consider $\{V_\alpha : \alpha \in A\}.$
Since $Y$ is ccc (and $A$ is uncountable.)
there exist distinct $\alpha, \beta \in A$ s.t. $V_\alpha \cap V_\beta \neq \varnothing$.
By $(*)$, $U_\alpha \cap U_\beta \neq \varnothing.$

$X$ is a topological space.
For any collection $\{U_\alpha:\alpha\in\omega_1\}$ of non-empty open sets.
There exists $\{A \subseteq \omega_1\}$ with $|A| = \omega_1$ and
$\{U_\alpha :\alpha \in A\}$ has the fip.

(The property will call $\aleph_1$ is precaliber of $X$
has $\aleph_1$ as a precaliber to the ccc by $MA({\aleph_1}$)

---

## Lemma 3.6.7
There is a non-cc forcing poset $\mathbb{P}$ such that $MA(\aleph_1)$ fails.
*Proof* Consider $\mathbb{P}=\mathrm{Fn}(I,J)$.
For each $i\in I$ and $j \in J$, define
$$D_i = \{p\in P : i \in \mathrm{dom}(p)\}$$
and
$$R_j = \{p\in P: j\}$$
Since $p$ is fintie $p \cup \{(i,j)\}$ and $p \cap \{(i', j')\}$.
Similar as in the proof of Lemma 3.6.6,
we can show taht $D_i$ and $R_j$ are dense in $\mathbb{P}$.

Consider $\mathcal{D} = \{D_i: i\in I\} \cup \{R_j:j\in J\}.$
We have $|\mathcal{D}| \leq |I| + |J| = \aleph_1$.

By $MA(\aleph_1)$, we obtain a filter $G \subseteq \mathbb{P}$ s.t.
$$G \cap D_i \neq \varnothing \neq G \cap R_j$$
for any $i \in I$ and $j \in J$.

Similar as in the proof of Lemma 3.6.6. again.
- $f$ is a function ($G$ is a filter)
- $\mathrm{dom}(f) = I$ ($G\cap D_i \neq \varnothing$.)
- $\mathrm{ran}(f) = J$ ($G \cap R_i \neq \varnothing$.)
So $f: I \to J$ is onto, which is impossible.

## Poset: Atom
**Definition**
- $r \in \mathbb{P}$ is an atom if there is $p,q \leq r$ s.t. $p \perp q$.  
- $\mathbb{P}$ is atomless if there are no atoms in $\mathbb{P}$; i.e. $\forall p \in \mathbb{P}\,(q \leq p \wedge r \leq p \wedge q \perp r)$  
(ccc and atom are independent to each other.)

## Lemma 3.6.10
1. If $\mathbb{P}$ has an atom, then $MA_\mathbb{P}(\kappa)$ holds for all $\kappa$

*Proof*. Define
$$G = \{p\in\mathbb{P} : p \not\perp r\}.$$
Claim 1: $G \cap D \neq \varnothing$ for any dense $D \subseteq \mathbb{P}$.  
Suppose $D \subseteq \mathbb{P}$ is dense.  
Then, there is some $s \leq r$ s.t. $s\in D$. So, $s \in G\cap D$.  
($\forall p \in \mathbb{P}\, \exists q \in D\,(q \leq p)$)

Claim 2: $G$ is a filter.  
Closed upwardness is clear.  
Next, let $p,q \in G$.  
We have $s$ extends $p,r$ and $t$ extends $q,r$,  
since $r$ is an atom, we have $u$ extending $s,t$.  
So $u$ extends $p$ and $q$, and $u \in G$ ($\because u \leq r.$)

2. If $\mathbb{P}$ is atomless, then $MA_{\mathbb{P}}(\kappa)$ is false for $\kappa = 2^{|\mathbb{P}|}$  

*Proof*. Suppose that $\mathbb{P}$ is atomless.  
We show that for any filter $G \subseteq P$, there is some dense set $D \subseteq \mathbb{P}$ such that $G \cap D = \varnothing$.  

Let $G$ be a filter in $\mathbb{P}$.  
Define $D = \mathbb{P} \setminus G$.  
$D$ is dense.  
Let $p \in \mathbb{P}$.  
If $p \not\in G$, $p \in D$.  
Suppose $p \in G$, $p$ is not atom.  
So, there exists $p,q \leq r$ s.t. $p \perp q$.

Since $G$ is a filter, $r$ or $s$ lies outside $G$ (i.e., lies inside $D$)